# Transcription from Whisper and computation of the WER

The goal here is to transcript audio files using Whisper, to correct this transcription from eventual errors and to compute the Word Error Rate for each speaker. 

## Usage

* Launch the `Audio2txtgrid.sh` script. Use the **base** model (More information [here](#audio2txtgrid)):
```bash
./Audio2txtgrid.sh
```
* Import the `.TextGrid` file and the audio on [Elan](https://archive.mpi.nl/tla/elan).
* Split the speakers in different tiers.
* Export using the option *"texte délimité par des tabulations"* into the directory *"Whisper_WER/Whisper-split"*. This will be the non-corrected version of the transcription.
* Correct the transcription
* Export using the option *"texte délimité par des tabulations"* into the directory *"Corrigés/<name_of_the_audio>"*. If it doesn't exist, create it.
* Export using the option *"TextGrid Praat"* into the same directory.
* Execute the python program `WER.py` (More information [here](#WER)): 
```bash
python WER.py <name_of_the_audio_file_without_ext> 0
```

# User Manual

## Python programs

### whisper2txtgrid

When using Whisper on an audio file, we get several files as an output.  
This program converts the `.srt` output into a `.TextGrid` file : In this format we can import our transcription into **Elan** or **Praat**.  
It takes 2 files as an input (read on keyboard) :<br>
* The `.srt` file generated by Whisper<br>
* A `.TextGrid` file (Where the output will be written).  

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
### WER

Computes the **Word Error Count** between the reference from *whisper* and the manually corrected version.
Gives one *WER* by speaker. 

It takes 2 inputs (to give when executing the file) :
* The base name of the file you are working on (the name of the audio file without the `.wav` extension) 
* Either 0 or 1 depending on which WER you want to compute :
    * 0 to compute the WER from whisper, read automatically the reference and hypothesis files as long as they have the right name :
         - `Whisper_WER/Whisper-split/<file_name>-split.txt`
         - `Corrigés/<file_name>/<file_name>.txt`.
    * 1 to compute the WER from PLSPP, ead automatically the reference and hypothesis files as long as they have the right name :
        - `PLSPP_WER/PLSPP_WER_format/<file_name>_pipeRes.txt`
        - `PLSPP_WER/Corr_WER_format/<file_name>_corRes.txt`

In both cases the program creates a `.res` result file in the corresponding directory (*"Whisper_WER/WER"* for 0 and *"PLSPP_WER/WER"* for 1)

**/!\\** the speakers need to be separated manually, both for the reference from whisper and the corrected version :  
    This has to be done on **ELAN** and exported with the option *"texte délimité par des tabulations"* and all parameters unchecked.  
    This gives a file of the format : 

```
speaker1_name      text text text text text
speaker1_name      text text text text text
speaker1_name      text text text text text
speaker2_name      text text text text text
speaker2_name      text text text text text
.
.
.
speakern_name      text text text text text
```
**The reference and the correction both need to be in this format, with the speakers in the same order**  

The WER is computed without taking into account ponctuation and capital letters.  

It uses this formula:  $`\text{WER} = \frac{\text{Substitutions} + \text{Insertions} + \text{Deletions}}{\text{total\_number\_of\_words}}`$  
 
The Algorithm uses the **Levenshtein distance method**.

## Scripts

### Audio2txtgrid

This script simultaneously launch Whisper on a given audio file, create the necessary files/directories and translate the newly generated `.srt` file into a `.TextGrid` file (by executing the [whisper2txtgrid](#whisper2txtgrid) python program).  
It takes 2 inputs (read on keyboard during the script's execution):   
* The audio file to be transcripted.  
* The model of Whisper to use.  

When executing the `whisper2txtgrid.py` program, 2 files are needed as inputs, these files have been created earlier in the script:   
* The `.srt` has been created in the *"srt"* folder.   
* The `.TextGrid` has been created in the *"Textgrid"* folder.
These files have the same name as the audio file. 

The script also create a folder in the *"Whisper"* folder, who's name is the same as the name of the audio file. This where all the files generated by Whisper will be kept.
